# Maths_Behind_DS_Duke_University

## Numbers- The Real Number Line
Okay, so first let's meet the real number line. What we do is we draw a line.<br><br>

And I refuse to ever draw it straight. Suppose this is the real number line. It goes all the way on the extreme right to positive infinity, and the extreme left to negative infinity.<br>

And you want to think of this as representing an infinite set. That infinite set is going to be called R, which we usually write this sort of blackboard R symbol. This is equal to the real numbers.<br>

So, now the idea is that every single dot along this line represents a real number. There's a ridiculously large, infinite number of them. And we're going to think about what some of those are. First, let's mark some we know. So usually, somewhere in the middle we put 0, and then we sort of make tick marks for whole numbers. So here's 1, here's 2, here's 3, here's 4, here's 5, on forever. Here's -1, here's -2. Here's -3 on forever. If we're being careful, we try to make the length of each of these little sticks the same.<br>

Okay. So what I just wrote down are whole numbers, who are often called integers. So a subset, if you called z consists of just the integers. This is dot, dot, dot, -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, on forever.<br>

Okay, not every single number on the real number line is an integer. In fact, most of them aren't. Suppose we blew up this little stick between one and two. Let's just take it out here and blow it up, just so we can see it better. Here's one at one end, here's two at the other end. Let's just draw that.<br>

The only thing you really need to know here, without getting into any details Is that every single thing between one and two is also a real number. Same between two and three, same between three and four, and that there's a ridiculously large infinite numbers between one and two, how do you make them all? So here's a recipe, take one put a dot, put any string of whole numbers you want afterwards So, for example, 1.1 is in there. There it is, about there. 1.1, about a tenth of the way. So is 1.4, there it is. So is 1.1538, which might be about there. And in fact, anything that you do whether you continue on finally or really infinitely is a real number. That's the case for any subinterval in here. So if I take this subinterval and I'd blow it up out here, here's -3, here's -2 right about there, might be minus 2.5. So really, a real number is any integer dot any string of integers you might possibly want.<br>

It's a little bit of a nicety, which we won't get into, which is that some of these strings of integers terminate, some of them don't. You've probably heard of real numbers like pi.<br>

Pi, somehow you've probably seen is approximately 3.14128, so on so forth, one of the things that goes bump in the night. There are real numbers which are represented as streams of decimals which continue on forever, don't repeat don't have any pattern. Those are called irrational numbers. We’re not going to think about those here. Really here the take home message is just a real number is a number along this line and there are a whole bunch of them. Okay, one of the things we often do as mathematicians is we compartmentalize big sets into smaller and smaller sets and give different categories for what things are. So the first very big division of the real numbers is into positives and negatives. So here's our friend, the real number line again. Here's zero. Anything to this side of zero will be called positive reals. Positive real numbers.<br>

Anything to this side, if we have a negative real numbers.<br>

So an example of a positive real number might be 5.3 might be 0.001. For example the negative real number right here might be negative 11.7 if we include zero, So the positive reals but including zero we often write the non negative reals- and if we include 0 on the other side we go from right, non positive reals.
<br>
Okay, fine, let's draw that real number line again. Let's try to get straighter each time. An important thing to realize so that in some sense numbers come in pairs, positive and negative versions of the same number. So here's 0. Suppose I take the number over here 7.1. It has a friend on the other side called negative 7.1. Just like here you have 10, here you have negative 10.<br>

Now notice 7.1 is not equal to -7.1. 10 is not equal to -10. However, 7.1 and -7.1 have one important thing in common, which that they have the same distance to zero. The distance from here to here is about 7.1, is exactly 7.1. And the distance from here to here is 7.1. There's a concept called absolute value. Let's define that.<br>

The absolute value- Of a real number and let's say the real number is X for the definition, which we denote like this, X with a little symbol around it. Notice that it looks exactly like the definition of cardinality of a set, which is unfortunate.<br>

Is the distance- From X to 0, so you want to start at x, you want to walk to 0 and let's figure out how many units you've walked.
Play video starting at :7:6 and follow transcript7:06<br>
We'll notice over here that the absolute value of 7.1 is 7.1 and the absolute value of minus 7.1 Is 7.1, which by the way is the same thing has negative, -7.1. That's not just a huge little formula. We all know that negative times negative equals positive. But it allows us to make a general definition. So let's write that down in here, through the general rule For any real number, for any x in R, the following is true. The absolute value of an x can be one of two things. What I'm going to do here is give you what's called a definition by cases. Part of the point of teaching this is not just to give you the formula for the absolute value. But also you're going to see this definition by cases throughout data science. Death of value of x is equal to plain old x if x is non negative.
<br>
But it's equal to negative x if x is negative.<br>

Let's check if that's true, and while we check this, this'll sort of show us how to parse the definition by cases.<br>

So let's compute the absolute value of 8.7. So according to this definition, 8.7 is our It's either going to be 8.7 or negative 8.7. But which case happens? 8.7 is non-negative so i'm in this case up here. So this is just equal to 8.7. And that's true. Right, I draw my real number line. Here's zero. Here's 8.7.
<br>
That distance is 8.7. Let's check a different one.
<br>
This shouldn't surprise you, let's check a -1. So let's say let's check -10, the absolute value of -10. What should this be by the way? If here is -10, it should be this distance.<br>

Which is 10. So I go through my definition. -10, okay, 10 is negative. Therefore, this formula tells me to take the negative of -10. Is equal to negative -10, <br>
Okay, that concludes this video where we've learned what the real number line looks like, what it means to be positive, negative, non-negative and non-positive, and also about absolute values.
<br>
In the next video, we're going to jump into the idea of inequalities. What it means for one number to be less than another number, less than or equal to another number, and so on. And we'll connect that back to absolute value.


## Numbers - Interval and Interval Notations<br>
So here's the real number line. We've talked before about finite sets, but in fact the real number line is an infinite set.<br> Think of the large infinite number of things on this. <br>
Now there's a lot of subsets of this which are also ridiculously large and infinite. So let's just jump right in, this symbol, [2, 3.1]. <br>
This is an infinite set, but if an infinite set has got a finite bound -- we'll talk about how to describe what this is -- this is equal to the set of all numbers X in R, which satisfy two conditions. <br>
First, X has to be greater than or equal to two, and X has to be less than or equal to 3.1. <br>

In other words, to draw this on the real number line, here's two, here's 3.1, and X is trapped in between these two boundaries but it can hit up to both.<br>
So X is any number in the world as long as X is greater than or equal to two, less or equal to 3.1. So let's name some things in here. For example, 2.3 is in [2, 3.1] because two is less or equal to 2.3, and 2.3 is less or equal to 3.1. Three is in there, also 3.1 is in there, but one is not in the closed interval from two to 3.1, because one is not in fact less or equal to two even though it is actually less or equal to 3.1, well it's not greater or equal to two. OK, so that's a closed interval. Let's introduce the next idea. <br>

Suppose I give you (5,8) and here I use parentheses instead of those bracket symbols. This stands for an infinite set, the set of X in R, such that X is strictly greater than 5 and just strictly less than 8. So, the way we note this is, here is zero. We make a little open symbol for 5, little open symbol for 8, then we just take all the things in between. So the idea is you have to be between 5 and 8 but you can't hit up against those end points. So for example, 5.5 is in the open interval from 5-8, so is 5.0001 is in the open interval from 5-8 but sadly five is not in the open interval from 5-8, because five is not less than five even though it is less than eight. So you might want to think, by the way, what's the difference between the closed interval from 5-8 and the open interval from 5-8?<br>

They differ in exactly two numbers. They differ in five and eight. Five and eight are in the top one and not on the bottom. Okay so those are two extremes, here's two things in the middle, which we call "half-open intervals". Let's take for example, (-7.1,15]. You might already be able to guess this. On the open side, that means we use a strict inequality, and on the other one we use less than or equal to. This is an infinite set. Set of all X in R such that -7.1 is strictly less than X is less than or equal to 15. So how am I be drawing that, here is an open -7.1. There is zero, just so we know where we are, and there the closed 15 off the scale and all that stuff in there. Okay, we'll take the other extreme. So let's say for example, [20,20.3).<br>

This will be the set of all X in R plus the 20 is less three or equal to X and less than 20.3. Draw again the real number line. Here's my zero, let's see here's the 20 and here is an open 20.3. There's the stuff in here. But a little point to make, in some sense this seems really small, 20 to 20.3 is really tiny on the real number line compared to -7.1 to 15. It's got infinitely large number of numbers in there. That's the hilarious thing about the real number line. There's a lot of fancy math which you will get into behind it.<br>
<b>We've seen closed intervals, like [2, 3.1] </b>.<br> <b> We've seen open intervals, like (5,8) </b> <br>. <b> And within two species of half open intervals, like (2,3] and like [20,20.3) </b> <br>. <b>Sometimes if we want fancy vocabulary, the first of these half open interval is called left open, this is called right open, that doesn't really matter. OK, let's show you one more slightly more exotic form. Suppose we write, close_two_comma_infinity. This just stands for the set of all X in R, such that X is the greater than or equal to 2, full stop. You don't have to be less than infinity because every number is less than infinity. We often draw that on the real number line, here is zero, there's a two and we just take all the stuff here, kind of going on forever </b>. This is often what we call a "ray". You could also have for example, a minus_infinity_ to_7.1_open. This is the set of all X in R, that should be X is less than 7.1, and you get the idea. Okay, let's close by tying in to the algebra we recalled in this video. We're already comfortable with the idea that if someone asked you to solve for X, and X+5=10, you do some algebra and you solve that X equals five. So X=5 is the answer, a number is an answer. Suppose on the other hand, someone gives you the following problem: Tell me everything you know about X if the following is true; 1_is_less_or_equal_to_X_plus_five_is_less_than_ten. So notice here, a single number is not the answer. For example, if X=4, then 4+5=9, nine is less than 10, nine is greater than or equal to one, but 3.9 would also work. In fact, it turns out that the answer is an interval. If we do a little bit of algebra, let's subtract five from all sides of this. Let's subtract five from the left side, I get -4 is less than or equal to, subtract five from the middle I just get plain old X that's why I subtracted five, that wasn't random. Subtract five from the right, I get 10 minus fSo here's the real number line. We've talked before about finite sets, but in fact the real number line is an infinite set. Think of the large infinite number of things on this. Now there's a lot of subsets of this which are also ridiculously large and infinite. So let's just jump right in, this symbol, [2, 3.1]. This is an infinite set, but if an infinite set has got a finite bound -- we'll talk about how to describe what this is -- this is equal to the set of all numbers X in R, which satisfy two conditions. First, X has to be greater than or equal to two, and X has to be less than or equal to 3.1. In other words, to draw this on the real number line, here's two, here's 3.1, and X is trapped in between these two boundaries but it can hit up to both. So X is any number in the world as long as X is greater than or equal to two, less or equal to 3.1. So let's name some things in here. For example, 2.3 is in [2, 3.1] because two is less or equal to 2.3, and 2.3 is less or equal to 3.1. Three is in there, also 3.1 is in there, but one is not in the closed interval from two to 3.1, because one is not in fact less or equal to two even though it is actually less or equal to 3.1, well it's not greater or equal to two. OK, so that's a closed interval. Let's introduce the next idea. Suppose I give you (5,8) and here I use parentheses instead of those bracket symbols. This stands for an infinite set, the set of X in R, such that X is strictly greater than five and just strictly less than eight. So, the way we note this is, here is zero. We make a little open symbol for five, little open symbol for eight, then we just take all the things in between. So the idea is you have to be between five and eight but you can't hit up against those end points. So for example, 5.5 is in the open interval from 5-8, so is 5.0001 is in the open interval from 5-8 but sadly five is not in the open interval from 5-8, because five is not less than five even though it is less than eight. So you might want to think, by the way, what's the difference between the closed interval from 5-8 and the open interval from 5-8? They differ in exactly two numbers. They differ in five and eight. Five and eight are in the top one and not on the bottom. Okay so those are two extremes, here's two things in the middle, which we call "half-open intervals". Let's take for example, (-7.1,15]. You might already be able to guess this. On the open side, that means we use a strict inequality, and on the other one we use less than or equal to. This is an infinite set. Set of all X in R such that -7.1 is strictly less than X is less than or equal to 15. So how am I be drawing that, here is an open -7.1. There is zero, just so we know where we are, and there the closed 15 off the scale and all that stuff in there. Okay, we'll take the other extreme. So let's say for example, [20,20.3). This will be the set of all X in R plus the 20 is less three or equal to X and less than 20.3. Draw again the real number line. Here's my zero, let's see here's the 20 and here is an open 20.3. There's the stuff in here. But a little point to make, in some sense this seems really small, 20 to 20.3 is really tiny on the real number line compared to -7.1 to 15. It's got infinitely large number of numbers in there. That's the hilarious thing about the real number line. There's a lot of fancy math which you will get into behind it. We've seen closed intervals, like [2, 3.1]. We've seen open intervals, like (5,8). And within two species of half open intervals, like (2,3] and like [20,20.3). Sometimes if we want fancy vocabulary, the first of these half open interval is called left open, this is called right open, that doesn't really matter. OK, let's show you one more slightly more exotic form. Suppose we write, close_two_comma_infinity. This just stands for the set of all X in R, such that X is the greater than or equal to 2, full stop. You don't have to be less than infinity because every number is less than infinity. We often draw that on the real number line, here is zero, there's a two and we just take all the stuff here, kind of going on forever. This is often what we call a "ray". You could also have for example, a minus_infinity_ to_7.1_open. This is the set of all X in R, that should be X is less than 7.1, and you get the idea. Okay, let's close by tying in to the algebra we recalled in this video. We're already comfortable with the idea that if someone asked you to solve for X, and X+5=10, you do some algebra and you solve that X equals five. So X=5 is the answer, a number is an answer. Suppose on the other hand, someone gives you the following problem: Tell me everything you know about X if the following is true; 1_is_less_or_equal_to_X_plus_five_is_less_than_ten. So notice here, a single number is not the answer. For example, if X=4, then 4+5=9, nine is less than 10, nine is greater than or equal to one, but 3.9 would also work. In fact, it turns out that the answer is an interval. If we do a little bit of algebra, let's subtract five from all sides of this. Let's subtract five from the left side, I get -4 is less than or equal to, subtract five from the middle I just get plain old X that's why I subtracted five, that wasn't random. Subtract five from the right, I get 10 minus five or just five. In other words, the first puzzle tells me that the answer is any X in this range. So in other words, as long as X is in the half open interval from [-4,5), that's the answer. That tells me, any X in here tells me, that this up here is true. OK, that concludes everything.ive or just five. In other words, the first puzzle tells me that the answer is any X in this range. So in other words, as long as X is in the half open interval from [-4,5), that's the answer. That tells me, any X in here tells me, that this up here is true. OK, that concludes everything.

